.\" docs/man/meow-config.5
.TH MEOW-CONFIG 5 "2025-10-04" "meow" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
meow-config \- configuration format for the \fBmeow\fR CLI
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ~/.config/meowg1k/config.yaml
.br
.B ./.meowg1k.yaml
.br
Specified via \fB\-\-config\fR \fIFILE\fR flag

.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBmeow\fR CLI uses a hierarchical, profile-based YAML configuration
system to define all behavior. Configuration supports multiple AI providers,
reusable profiles, rate limiting, token caps, file filtering, and sophisticated
rule-based processing for commit and PR generation.
.PP
Configuration files are read with the following precedence (each subsequent
location overrides the previous):
.IP "1." 3
User config: \fB~/.config/meowg1k/config.yaml\fR
.br
Personal defaults, not committed to version control.
.IP "2."
Project config: \fB./.meowg1k.yaml\fR
.br
Team-shared settings, recommended to commit to repository.
.IP "3."
Explicit config: specified via \fB\-\-config\fR flag
.br
Overrides all other configurations when specified.
.PP
The configuration system supports all major LLM providers: Google Gemini,
OpenAI, Anthropic Claude, OpenRouter, Voyage AI (embeddings), llama.cpp,
and OpenAI-compatible APIs. It includes comprehensive model registry with
automatic tokenizer detection.
.SH FORMAT
YAML format, UTF-8 encoding.
.PP
Top-level configuration structure:
.PP
.nf
profiles:
  <profile-name>: { ... }

filter:
  ignore: [ ... ]

summarize:
  default: { ... }
  rules: [ ... ]

write:
  default: { ... }
  tasks: { ... }

commit:
  profile: "..."
  systemPrompt: "..."

pr:
  profile: "..."
  systemPrompt: "..."
.fi
.SH CONFIGURATION SECTIONS

.SS profiles
Map of reusable provider configurations. Each profile is a named set of
settings for an AI provider. Profiles can be referenced by name from other
configuration sections.
.PP
Profile fields:
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBprovider\fR (required): Provider type. One of: "gemini", "openai",
"anthropic", "openrouter", "voyage", "llama", "openai-compatible"
.IP \[bu]
\fBmodel\fR (optional): Model name. Uses smart defaults if omitted.
.IP \[bu]
\fBbaseURL\fR (required for llama/openai-compatible): Base API URL.
.IP \[bu]
\fBapiKeyEnv\fR (optional): Environment variable name for API key. Uses
provider-specific defaults if omitted.
.IP \[bu]
\fBmaxInputTokens\fR (optional): Maximum input tokens, default 8192.
.IP \[bu]
\fBmaxOutputTokens\fR (optional): Maximum output tokens, provider-specific default.
.IP \[bu]
\fBtimeout\fR (optional): Request timeout, default "5m".
.IP \[bu]
\fBrequestsPerMinute\fR (optional): Rate limit, requests per minute. 0 = unlimited.
.IP \[bu]
\fBrequestsPerDay\fR (optional): Rate limit, requests per day. 0 = unlimited.
.IP \[bu]
\fBtokensPerMinute\fR (optional): Rate limit, tokens per minute. 0 = unlimited.
.IP \[bu]
\fBtemperature\fR (optional): Sampling temperature (0.0-2.0). Higher values
increase randomness. Default varies by provider.
.IP \[bu]
\fBtopP\fR (optional): Nucleus sampling parameter (0.0-1.0). Limits token
selection to top probability mass.
.IP \[bu]
\fBtopK\fR (optional): Top-K sampling parameter. Limits token selection to
K most likely tokens.
.IP \[bu]
\fBmaxTokens\fR (optional): Maximum tokens to write. Overrides maxOutputTokens.
.IP \[bu]
\fBfrequencyPenalty\fR (optional): Penalty for token frequency (-2.0 to 2.0).
Reduces repetition by penalizing tokens that appear frequently.
.IP \[bu]
\fBpresencePenalty\fR (optional): Penalty for token presence (-2.0 to 2.0).
Encourages topic diversity.
.IP \[bu]
\fBrepetitionPenalty\fR (optional): Penalty for repetition (0.0-2.0).
OpenRouter and llama.cpp only.
.IP \[bu]
\fBseed\fR (optional): Random seed for deterministic generation.
.IP \[bu]
\fBstop\fR (optional): Stop sequences. Array of strings or single string.
.IP \[bu]
\fBresponseFormat\fR (optional): Response format. Values: "text",
"json_object", "json_schema".
.IP \[bu]
\fBresponseSchema\fR (optional): JSON schema for structured output.
Used with responseFormat: "json_schema".
.IP \[bu]
\fBcandidateCount\fR (optional): Number of response candidates to write.
Gemini and OpenAI (as 'n') only.
.IP \[bu]
\fBlogProbs\fR (optional): Enable log probabilities (boolean).
.IP \[bu]
\fBtopLogProbs\fR (optional): Number of top log probabilities per token (0-20).
.IP \[bu]
\fBlogitBias\fR (optional): Map of token IDs to bias values (-100 to 100).
.IP \[bu]
\fBserviceTier\fR (optional): OpenAI service tier (e.g., "auto", "default").
.IP \[bu]
\fBuser\fR (optional): End-user identifier. OpenAI only.
.IP \[bu]
\fBminP\fR (optional): Minimum probability threshold (0.0-1.0).
OpenRouter and llama.cpp only.
.IP \[bu]
\fBtopA\fR (optional): Top-A filtering (0.0-1.0). OpenRouter only.
.IP \[bu]
\fBtypicalP\fR (optional): Locally typical sampling (0.0-1.0). Llama.cpp only.
.IP \[bu]
\fBmirostat\fR (optional): Mirostat mode (0, 1, or 2). Llama.cpp only.
.IP \[bu]
\fBmirostatTau\fR (optional): Mirostat target entropy. Llama.cpp only.
.IP \[bu]
\fBmirostatEta\fR (optional): Mirostat learning rate. Llama.cpp only.
.IP \[bu]
\fBgrammar\fR (optional): GBNF grammar string. Llama.cpp only.
.PP
See \fBmeow-config\fR(5) for detailed parameter descriptions
and provider support matrix.

.SS filter
File filtering configuration using gitignore-style patterns. Essential for
both security (exclude files containing secrets) and efficiency (exclude
dependencies, build artifacts).
.PP
Fields:
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBignore\fR: Array of glob patterns to exclude from analysis.

.SS summarize
Configuration for the "Map" phase of commit and pr commands. Each changed
file is analyzed individually according to these rules.
.PP
Fields:
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBdefault\fR: Default settings applied when no rule matches.
.RS
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBprofile\fR: Profile name to use.
.IP \[bu]
\fBsystemPrompt\fR: System prompt for file analysis.
.RE
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBrules\fR: Array of pattern-matching rules. First match wins.
.RS
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBmatch\fR: Glob pattern to match file paths.
.IP \[bu]
\fBskip\fR: If true, skip analysis of matching files entirely.
.IP \[bu]
\fBprofile\fR: Profile to use for matching files (overrides default).
.IP \[bu]
\fBsystemPrompt\fR: System prompt for matching files (overrides default).
.RE

.SS write
Configuration for the write command.
.PP
Fields:
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBdefault\fR: Default settings for generation.
.RS
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBprofile\fR: Default profile name.
.IP \[bu]
\fBsystemPrompt\fR: Default system prompt (optional).
.RE
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBtasks\fR: Map of predefined tasks.
.RS
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBprofile\fR: Profile for this task (optional, uses default if omitted).
.IP \[bu]
\fBsystemPrompt\fR: System prompt for this task (optional).
.IP \[bu]
\fBuserPrompt\fR: User prompt for this task.
.RE

.SS commit
Configuration for the "Reduce" phase of the commit command. Individual file
summaries are combined here to generate the final commit message.
.PP
Fields:
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBprofile\fR: Profile name to use for generating commit messages.
.IP \[bu]
\fBsystemPrompt\fR: System prompt that guides commit message generation.
Should include format instructions (e.g., Conventional Commits format).
.IP \[bu]
\fBstrategy\fR: Execution strategy (optional). One of:
.RS
.IP \[bu] 2
\fB"summarize"\fR (default): Uses the Map-Reduce approach. Each file is
analyzed individually, then summaries are combined to create the commit message.
Best for large commits with many files.
.IP \[bu]
\fB"flat"\fR: Sends the entire git diff directly to the model without
intermediate summarization. Faster and more efficient for small commits
(e.g., single file or a few lines). Will fail if diff exceeds model's
token limit.
.RE

.SS pr
Configuration for the "Reduce" phase of the PR draft command. Individual file
summaries are combined here to generate the final PR description.
.PP
Fields:
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBprofile\fR: Profile name to use for generating PR descriptions.
.IP \[bu]
\fBsystemPrompt\fR: System prompt that guides PR description generation.
Should include template and format instructions.
.IP \[bu]
\fBstrategy\fR: Execution strategy (optional). One of:
.RS
.IP \[bu] 2
\fB"summarize"\fR (default): Uses the Map-Reduce approach. Each file is
analyzed individually, then summaries are combined to create the PR description.
Best for large PRs with many files.
.IP \[bu]
\fB"flat"\fR: Sends the entire git diff directly to the model without
intermediate summarization. Faster and more efficient for small PRs
(e.g., a few files or simple changes). Will fail if diff exceeds model's
token limit.
.RE

.SH PROVIDER DEFAULTS
Each provider has smart defaults for model selection and API key environment
variable names:
.TP
.B gemini
Default model: \fBgemini-2.5-flash\fR
.br
API key: \fBMEOW_GEMINI_API_KEY\fR
.br
Base URL: https://generativelanguage.googleapis.com
.TP
.B openai
Default model: \fBgpt-4o-mini\fR
.br
API key: \fBMEOW_OPENAI_API_KEY\fR
.br
Base URL: https://api.openai.com/v1
.TP
.B anthropic
Default model: \fBclaude-3-5-haiku-20241022\fR
.br
API key: \fBMEOW_ANTHROPIC_API_KEY\fR
.br
Base URL: https://api.anthropic.com
.TP
.B openrouter
Default model: \fBmeta-llama/llama-3.2-3b-instruct:free\fR
.br
API key: \fBMEOW_OPENROUTER_API_KEY\fR
.br
Base URL: https://openrouter.ai/api/v1
.TP
.B voyage
Default model: \fBvoyage-3.5\fR
.br
API key: \fBMEOW_VOYAGE_API_KEY\fR
.br
Note: Embeddings only, not for text generation.
.TP
.B llama
API key: \fBMEOW_LLAMA_API_KEY\fR (optional)
.br
Base URL: Must be explicitly configured in profile (e.g., http://localhost:8080)
.br
For local llama.cpp HTTP server.
.TP
.B openai-compatible
API key: \fBMEOW_OPENAI_COMPATIBLE_API_KEY\fR
.br
Base URL: Must be explicitly configured in profile.
.br
For any OpenAI-compatible API endpoint.

.SH EXAMPLES

.SS Minimal Configuration
Basic setup with two profiles:
.PP
.nf
profiles:
  fast:
    provider: "gemini"
  smart:
    provider: "openai"
    model: "gpt-4o"

write:
  default:
    profile: "gemini-flash"
.fi

.SS Complete Project Configuration
Comprehensive setup for a development team:
.PP
.nf
# .meowg1k.yaml

profiles:
  gemini-fast:
    provider: "gemini"
    model: "gemini-2.5-flash"
    requestsPerMinute: 60

  claude-smart:
    provider: "anthropic"
    model: "claude-sonnet-4-5-20250929"
    maxInputTokens: 180000
    timeout: "10m"
    requestsPerMinute: 20
    requestsPerDay: 500

  local-dev:
    provider: "llama"
    baseURL: "http://localhost:8080"

# Security: exclude secrets and sensitive files
filter:
  ignore:
    - "node_modules/**"
    - "dist/**"
    - "**/*.pem"
    - "**/*.key"
    - ".env*"
    - "secrets.yaml"

# Map phase: analyze individual files
summarize:
  default:
    profile: "gemini-fast"
    systemPrompt: "Provide a concise summary of this change."

  rules:
    # Skip documentation
    - match: "**/*.md"
      skip: true

    # Deep analysis for critical services
    - match: "internal/services/**/*.go"
      profile: "claude-smart"
      systemPrompt: |
        Analyze this business logic change carefully.
        Focus on correctness and side effects.

    # Skip test snapshots
    - match: "**/*.snap"
      skip: true

# Generate command configuration
write:
  default:
    profile: "gemini-fast"
    systemPrompt: "You are an expert software engineer."

  tasks:
    review:
      profile: "claude-smart"
      userPrompt: "Perform thorough code review."

    security:
      profile: "claude-smart"
      userPrompt: |
        Analyze for security vulnerabilities:
        SQL injection, XSS, insecure crypto, etc.

    refactor:
      userPrompt: "Suggest refactoring improvements."

# Reduce phase: generate commit message
commit:
  profile: "claude-smart"
  systemPrompt: |
    You are an expert software engineer reviewing changes.
    Write a commit message in Conventional Commits format.

    Rules:
    1. Type: feat, fix, refactor, docs, test, chore, ci
    2. Scope: logical component (e.g., auth, api, db)
    3. Subject: imperative mood, lowercase, no period
    4. Body: explain WHY, not just WHAT
    5. Footer: BREAKING CHANGE or issue references

# Reduce phase: generate PR description
pr:
  profile: "claude-smart"
  systemPrompt: |
    Generate a PR description in Markdown:

    ## Goal
    What problem does this solve? Link to issues.

    ## Summary of Changes
    - Bullet point list of key changes

    ## How to Test
    Step-by-step testing instructions

    ## Breaking Changes
    List any breaking changes or migrations needed
.fi

.SS Rate Limiting and Cost Control
Configuration with strict budget controls:
.PP
.nf
profiles:
  cost-controlled:
    provider: "openai"
    model: "gpt-4o"
    requestsPerMinute: 10
    requestsPerDay: 100
    tokensPerMinute: 20000
    maxInputTokens: 8000
    maxOutputTokens: 2000
.fi

.SS Local-Only Configuration
Complete offline setup using llama.cpp:
.PP
.nf
profiles:
  local-only:
    provider: "llama"
    baseURL: "http://localhost:8080"
    timeout: "15m"

write:
  default:
    profile: "local-only"

commit:
  profile: "local-only"

pr:
  profile: "local-only"
.fi

.SS Multi-Provider Strategy
Using different providers for different tasks:
.PP
.nf
profiles:
  free-tier:
    provider: "openrouter"
    model: "meta-llama/llama-3.1-8b-instruct:free"

  quality:
    provider: "anthropic"
    model: "claude-sonnet-4-5-20250929"

  embeddings:
    provider: "voyage"
    model: "voyage-3.5"

summarize:
  default:
    profile: "free-tier"

  rules:
    - match: "src/critical/**/*"
      profile: "quality"

commit:
  profile: "quality"

pr:
  profile: "quality"
.fi

.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/.config/meowg1k/config.yaml
User-level configuration. Personal defaults, not committed to version control.
.TP
.B ./.meowg1k.yaml
Project-level configuration. Should be committed to repository for team sharing.

.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
Configuration can reference environment variables for API keys. Standard
variables:
.TP
.B MEOW_GEMINI_API_KEY
.TP
.B MEOW_OPENAI_API_KEY
.TP
.B MEOW_ANTHROPIC_API_KEY
.TP
.B MEOW_OPENROUTER_API_KEY
.TP
.B MEOW_VOYAGE_API_KEY
.TP
.B MEOW_LLAMA_API_KEY
.TP
.B MEOW_OPENAI_COMPATIBLE_API_KEY
.PP
Custom variables can be specified using the \fBapiKeyEnv\fR field in profiles.

.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/.config/meowg1k/config.yaml
User-level configuration file for personal defaults.
.TP
.B ./.meowg1k.yaml
Project-level configuration file. Recommended for team-shared settings.
.TP
.B ./.meowg1k/logs/
Trace logs directory containing detailed execution logs in JSON Lines format.
Each command creates a unique timestamped .jsonl file. Should be excluded
from version control.

.SH BEST PRACTICES
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBCommit project configs:\fR Add .meowg1k.yaml to version control
for team consistency.
.IP \[bu]
\fBUse filter for security:\fR Always exclude files containing secrets,
keys, and proprietary code.
.IP \[bu]
\fBOptimize with rules:\fR Use summarize rules to apply expensive models only
where needed and skip non-critical files.
.IP \[bu]
\fBSet rate limits:\fR Configure requestsPerDay and tokensPerMinute to
prevent unexpected costs.
.IP \[bu]
\fBLocal for sensitive code:\fR Use llama provider for proprietary or
sensitive codebases to keep data local.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR meow (1),
.BR meow\-init (1),
.BR meow\-write (1),
.BR meow\-draft\-commit (1),
.BR meow\-draft\-pr (1),
.BR meow\-version (1),
.BR meow\-security (7)

.SH AUTHORS
Andrew Vasilyev <me@retran.me>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright © 2025 The meow Authors
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
.PP
Project page: https://github.com/retran/meowg1k
