.\" docs/man/meow-draft-commit.1
.TH MEOW-DRAFT-COMMIT 1 "2025-10-04" "meow" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
meow-draft-commit \- draft commit messages from staged changes or branch diffs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B meow draft commit
[\fIflags\fR]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B meow draft commit
generates commit messages by analyzing code changes. It operates in two modes:
.PP
.B Default Mode (Staged Changes):
Analyzes files staged with
.B git add
and generates a commit message based on those changes. This is the standard
workflow for creating individual commits.
.PP
.B Branch Diff Mode:
When
.B \-\-diff branch
is set along with
.B \-\-base ,
the command analyzes the diff between the current branch and the base branch.
This is useful for generating a single commit message that summarizes all changes before merging.
.PP
The command supports two execution strategies (configured in the
.B commit
section):
.PP
.B Summarize Strategy (default):
Uses a two-phase "Map-Reduce" approach:
.IP "1." 3
\fBMap Phase:\fR Each changed file is analyzed individually using
the configuration from the
.B summarize
section. Different files can use different profiles and prompts based on
pattern-matching rules.
.IP "2."
\fBReduce Phase:\fR The individual file summaries are combined and
sent to the AI to generate the final commit message using the configuration
from the
.B commit
section.
.PP
This approach optimizes for both quality (using powerful models where needed)
and cost (using fast, cheap models for routine analysis).
.PP
.B Flat Strategy:
Sends the entire git diff directly to the model in a single request. This is
faster and more efficient for small commits (e.g., a single file or a few
lines of changes), as it eliminates the overhead of the Map-Reduce pipeline.
However, if the diff size exceeds the model's token limit, the command will
fail with an error suggesting you switch to the "summarize" strategy.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-intent " " \fITEXT\fR
Provide developer intent or context for the commit. This high-level
description helps the AI generate a more accurate commit message. Can be
provided via this flag or piped through stdin. Example: "Fix the user
authentication bug" or "Add support for OAuth2 login".
.TP
.BR \-\-diff " " \fIMODE\fR
Select the diff source. Use \fBstaged\fR (default) for staged changes or
\fBbranch\fR to compare against a base branch.
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-base " " \fIBRANCH\fR
Base branch to compare against when \fB\-\-diff branch\fR is set. Common
values: \fBmain\fR, \fBdev\fR, \fBmaster\fR.
.TP
.BR \-\-workspace " " \fIDIRECTORY\fR
Specify the workspace root directory. Overrides automatic workspace detection.
.TP
.BR \-\-config " " \fIFILE\fR
Use a specific configuration file.
.TP
.BR \-\-silent
Enable silent mode for scripting.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show command help and usage information.

.SH CONFIGURATION
The command uses multiple configuration sections:
.PP
.B filter
(optional): Exclude files from analysis using gitignore-style patterns.
Essential for security (exclude secrets) and efficiency (exclude dependencies).
.PP
.B summarize
(required): Configure the Map phase where individual files are analyzed.
Supports a default profile and rule-based overrides:
.PP
.nf
summarize:
  default:
    profile: "gemini-flash"
    systemPrompt: "Summarize this change"

  rules:
    - match: "**/*.md"
      skip: true
    - match: "internal/critical/**/*.go"
      profile: "gemini-pro"
.fi
.PP
.B commit
(required): Configure the Reduce phase where file summaries are combined
into the final commit message. Also controls the execution strategy:
.PP
.nf
commit:
  profile: "gemini-pro"
  strategy: "summarize"  # or "flat" for small commits
  systemPrompt: |
    You are an expert software engineer. Write a commit message
    in Conventional Commits format based on the file summaries.
.fi
.PP
The
.B strategy
field (optional, default: "summarize") determines how the commit message
is generated:
.IP \[bu] 2
\fB"summarize"\fR: Uses the full Map-Reduce workflow. Best for commits
with many files or complex changes.
.IP \[bu]
\fB"flat"\fR: Sends the raw git diff directly to the model. Faster for
small commits (single file or minor changes). Fails if diff is too large.
.PP
See
.BR meow\-config (5)
for complete configuration reference.

.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Default Mode (Staged Changes)
Generate commit message from staged files:
.PP
.nf
.B git add src/auth.go src/user.go
.B meow draft commit
.fi
.PP
Provide developer intent:
.PP
.nf
.B git add .
.B meow draft commit \-i "Fix authentication bug affecting OAuth2 users"
.fi
.PP
Pipe intent via stdin:
.PP
.nf
.B git add .
.B echo "Refactor user service for better testability" | meow draft commit
.fi

.SS Branch Diff Mode
Generate message for all changes on feature branch:
.PP
.nf
.B meow draft commit \-\-diff branch \-\-base main
.fi
.PP
With intent for branch diff:
.PP
.nf
.B meow draft commit \-\-diff branch \-\-base dev \-i "Implement complete user profile feature"
.fi

.SS Git Hook Integration
Automatically generate commit messages with a prepare-commit-msg hook:
.PP
.nf
#!/bin/bash
# .git/hooks/prepare-commit-msg

COMMIT_MSG_FILE=$1
COMMIT_SOURCE=$2

if [ \-z "$COMMIT_SOURCE" ]; then
    echo "Generating commit message..."
    meow draft commit \-\-silent > "$COMMIT_MSG_FILE"
fi
.fi
.PP
Make executable:
.PP
.nf
.B chmod +x .git/hooks/prepare\-commit\-msg
.fi

.SS Silent Mode for Automation
Use in CI/CD pipelines:
.PP
.nf
.B git add .
.B COMMIT_MSG=$(meow draft commit \-\-silent)
.B git commit \-m "$COMMIT_MSG"
.fi

.SH ENVIRONMENT
Providers use environment variables for API keys. The specific variable
depends on the provider configured in your profile:
.TP
.B MEOW_GEMINI_API_KEY
For Gemini provider profiles.
.TP
.B MEOW_OPENAI_API_KEY
For OpenAI provider profiles.
.TP
.B MEOW_ANTHROPIC_API_KEY
For Anthropic provider profiles.
.TP
.B MEOW_OPENROUTER_API_KEY
For OpenRouter provider profiles.
.TP
.B MEOW_LLAMA_API_KEY
For llama.cpp provider profiles (optional).
.TP
.B MEOW_OPENAI_COMPATIBLE_API_KEY
For OpenAI-compatible provider profiles.

.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/.config/meowg1k/config.yaml
User-level configuration.
.TP
.B ./.meowg1k.yaml
Project-level configuration (recommended).

.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns 0 on success, non-zero on error.
.PP
Common errors:
.IP \[bu] 2
No staged changes (in default mode)
.IP \[bu]
Base branch not found (in branch diff mode)
.IP \[bu]
Configuration missing required profiles
.IP \[bu]
API authentication failure

.SH WORKFLOW
.B Typical Development Workflow:
.IP "1." 3
Make code changes
.IP "2."
Stage files: \fBgit add .\fR
.IP "3."
Generate message: \fBmeow draft commit\fR
.IP "4."
Review and commit: \fBgit commit \-m "$(meow draft commit \-\-silent)"\fR
.PP
.B Branch Diff Before Merge Workflow:
.IP "1." 3
Complete feature branch development
.IP "2."
Generate branch diff message: \fBmeow draft commit \-\-diff branch \-\-base main\fR
.IP "3."
Use message for merge or squash

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR meow (1),
.BR meow\-init (1),
.BR meow\-write (1),
.BR meow\-draft\-pr (1),
.BR meow\-config (5),
.BR git\-add (1),
.BR git\-commit (1)

.SH AUTHORS
Andrew Vasilyev <me@retran.me>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright © 2025 The meow Authors
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
.PP
Project page: https://github.com/retran/meowg1k
