.\" docs/man/meow-version.1
.TH MEOW-VERSION 1 "2025-10-04" "meowg1k" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
meow-version \- display version and build information
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B meow version
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B meow version
command displays version information about the installed
.B meow
binary, including the version number (or git commit hash for development
builds), build date, and the git commit from which it was built.
.PP
This information is useful for:
.IP \[bu] 2
Verifying which version is installed
.IP \[bu]
Troubleshooting and bug reporting
.IP \[bu]
Confirming successful updates
.IP \[bu]
Identifying development builds vs. official releases

.SH OUTPUT
The command prints three lines of information:
.TP
.B Version
For official releases, shows a semantic version (e.g., "v1.2.3"). For
development builds from source, shows the git commit hash. May include
a "-dirty" suffix indicating uncommitted changes in the build environment.
.TP
.B Build Date
The date and time when the binary was compiled, in YYYY-MM-DD_HH:MM:SS format.
.TP
.B Git Commit
The short git commit hash from which the binary was built.

.SH EXAMPLES
Display version information:
.PP
.nf
.B meow version
.fi
.PP
Example output from an official release:
.PP
.nf
meow version v1.2.3
Build Date: 2025-10-04_12:34:56
Git Commit: a1b2c3d
.fi
.PP
Example output from a development build:
.PP
.nf
meow version 85f0b68-dirty
Build Date: 2025-10-03_21:15:50
Git Commit: 85f0b68
.fi
.PP
Use in shell scripts:
.PP
.nf
.B if meow version | grep -q "v1.2"; then
.B     echo "Compatible version"
.B fi
.fi

.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns 0 on success, non-zero on error.

.SH NOTES
The version information is embedded in the binary at compile time. It cannot
be changed without recompiling.
.PP
Development builds (installed via \fBgo install\fR from a git repository)
will show the commit hash instead of a semantic version number.
.PP
The "-dirty" suffix indicates the binary was built from a repository with
uncommitted changes. Official releases will never have this suffix.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR meow (1),
.BR meow\-init (1),
.BR meow\-generate (1),
.BR meow\-commit (1),
.BR meow\-pullrequest (1),
.BR meow\-config (5),
.BR meow\-security (7)

.SH AUTHORS
Andrew Vasilyev <me@retran.me>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2025 Andrew Vasilyev.
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
.PP
Project page: https://github.com/retran/meowg1k
