.\" docs/man/meow-query.1
.TH MEOW-QUERY 1 "2025-10-15" "meowg1k" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
meow-query \- search for code using semantic similarity
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B meow query
\fITEXT\fR [\fIflags\fR]
.br
.B meow q
\fITEXT\fR [\fIflags\fR]
.br
.B echo
"\fITEXT\fR" |
.B meow query
[\fIflags\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B meow query
searches for code chunks similar to the query text using vector similarity
(semantic search). Unlike traditional text search that relies on exact keyword
matching, semantic search uses vector embeddings to understand the
.B meaning
of your query and match it with relevant code, even when the exact words
don't appear in your code.
.PP
The command:
.IP "1." 3
Computes an embedding for your search query
.IP "2."
Searches HNSW indices for the most similar code chunks
.IP "3."
Returns results with similarity scores, file paths, and line numbers
.IP "4."
Supports filtering by snapshot and minimum score threshold
.PP
Results are returned in order of decreasing similarity, showing the most
relevant code first. Each result includes the similarity score (0.0 to 1.0),
file path, line range, and the actual code content.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-k ", " \-\-top\-k " " \fINUMBER\fR
Number of top results to return. Default: 10. Increase for broader searches,
decrease for focused results.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-snapshots " " \fILIST\fR
Snapshots to search. Comma-separated list of: \fB_workdir_\fR, \fB_stage_\fR,
\fB_head_\fR. Default: all three. Use to limit search scope. Example:
\fB_workdir_,_stage_\fR searches only uncommitted and staged changes.
.TP
.BR \-\-min\-score " " \fIFLOAT\fR
Minimum similarity score threshold (0.0 to 1.0). Results below this score
are filtered out. Default: 0.0 (no filtering). Higher values = more relevant
but fewer results. Recommended range: 0.5-0.8.
.TP
.BR \-\-json
Output results in JSON format for scripting and automation. Default is
human-readable text format.
.TP
.BR \-\-workspace " " \fIDIRECTORY\fR
Specify the workspace root directory. Overrides automatic workspace detection.
.TP
.BR \-\-config " " \fIFILE\fR
Use a specific configuration file.
.TP
.BR \-\-silent
Enable silent mode. Only outputs results, no progress indicators.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show command help and usage information.

.SH CONFIGURATION
The command uses the embedding profile configured for
.BR meow-index (1):
.PP
.nf
index:
  profile: "embeddings"

profiles:
  embeddings:
    model: "gemini-embeddings"
.fi
.PP
The same embedding model must be used for both indexing and querying.
Switching embedding models requires re-indexing with
.BR meow-index (1).

.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Basic Semantic Search
Find authentication-related code:
.PP
.nf
.B meow query "authentication logic"
.fi
.PP
Example output:
.PP
.nf
Found 3 results:

=== Result 1 (Score: 0.8542) ===
File: internal/auth/service.go (Lines 45-67)

func (s *Service) Authenticate(ctx context.Context, token string) (*User, error) {
    claims, err := s.jwtService.ValidateToken(token)
    if err != nil {
        return nil, fmt.Errorf("invalid token: %w", err)
    }
    // ... rest of function
}

=== Result 2 (Score: 0.7891) ===
(additional results)
.fi

.SS Get More Results
Search for error handling with higher result count:
.PP
.nf
.B meow query "error handling" \-\-top\-k 20
.fi

.SS Filter by Score
Only show highly relevant results:
.PP
.nf
.B meow query "database queries" \-\-min\-score 0.7
.fi

.SS Search Specific Snapshots
Search only uncommitted changes:
.PP
.nf
.B meow query "new feature" \-\-snapshots _workdir_
.fi
.PP
Search only committed code:
.PP
.nf
.B meow query "authentication" \-\-snapshots _head_
.fi

.SS JSON Output for Scripting
Export results as JSON:
.PP
.nf
.B meow query "API endpoints" \-\-json | jq '.[] | .FilePath'
.fi
.PP
Process results in a script:
.PP
.nf
#!/bin/bash
results=$(meow query "$1" \-\-json)
echo "$results" | jq -r '.[] | "\\(.FilePath):\\(.StartLine)"'
.fi

.SS Search from Stdin
Pipe query text via stdin:
.PP
.nf
.B echo "database connection" | meow query
.fi
.PP
Use in scripts:
.PP
.nf
.B cat query.txt | meow query \-\-top\-k 5
.fi

.SS Finding Code Without Exact Terms
Semantic search finds code by meaning, not just keywords:
.PP
.nf
# Finds error handling even without word "error"
.B meow query "error handling and validation"

# Finds rate limiting code with various implementations
.B meow query "rate limiting and throttling"

# Finds database code regardless of ORM used
.B meow query "database queries and transactions"
.fi

.SH TUNING GUIDELINES
.SS Broad Questions
When searching for general concepts or exploring unfamiliar code:
.IP \[bu] 2
Higher \fB\-\-top-k\fR (10-20)
.IP \[bu]
Lower \fB\-\-min-score\fR (0.5-0.6)
.IP \[bu]
Search all snapshots
.PP
Example:
.PP
.nf
.B meow query "how does the system work" \-\-top\-k 20 \-\-min\-score 0.5
.fi

.SS Specific Questions
When looking for particular functions or implementations:
.IP \[bu] 2
Lower \fB\-\-top-k\fR (3-5)
.IP \[bu]
Higher \fB\-\-min-score\fR (0.7-0.8)
.IP \[bu]
May limit to specific snapshots
.PP
Example:
.PP
.nf
.B meow query "login function implementation" \-\-top\-k 5 \-\-min\-score 0.7
.fi

.SH TROUBLESHOOTING
.SS No Results Found
Possible causes and solutions:
.IP \[bu] 2
Index not built: Run \fBmeow index\fR first
.IP \[bu]
Query too specific: Try more general terms
.IP \[bu]
\fB\-\-min-score\fR too high: Lower the threshold
.IP \[bu]
Filters too aggressive: Check filter configuration
.PP
.nf
# Debug with low threshold and high result count
.B meow query "your query" \-\-top\-k 20 \-\-min\-score 0.3
.fi

.SS Results Not Relevant
Solutions:
.IP \[bu] 2
Increase \fB\-\-min-score\fR to filter low-quality matches
.IP \[bu]
Make query more specific
.IP \[bu]
Re-index if codebase changed significantly
.IP \[bu]
Check if important files are being excluded by filters

.SS Index Outdated
Re-index after:
.IP \[bu] 2
Pulling changes from Git
.IP \[bu]
Making significant code changes
.IP \[bu]
Switching branches
.PP
.nf
.B meow index
.fi

.SH ENVIRONMENT
Uses the embedding provider's API key configured for indexing:
.TP
.B MEOW_GEMINI_API_KEY
For Gemini embedding models.
.TP
.B MEOW_OPENAI_API_KEY
For OpenAI embedding models.
.TP
.B MEOW_VOYAGE_API_KEY
For Voyage AI embedding models.
.TP
.B MEOW_LLAMA_API_KEY
For llama.cpp server (optional).

.SH FILES
.TP
.B ./.meowg1k/meowg1k.db
SQLite database containing vector indices. Must exist (created by
\fBmeow index\fR).

.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns 0 on success, non-zero on error.
.PP
Common errors:
.IP \[bu] 2
No index found (run \fBmeow index\fR first)
.IP \[bu]
Embedding API authentication failure
.IP \[bu]
Invalid snapshot names

.SH COMPARISON WITH TEXT SEARCH
.B Traditional text search (grep, git grep):
.RS
Matches exact keywords. Fast but misses semantic matches. Example:
searching "error" misses "failure", "exception", "err".
.RE
.PP
.B Semantic search (meow query):
.RS
Matches by meaning. Finds relevant code even with different words.
Example: "authentication logic" finds JWT validation, token verification,
user lookup, session management.
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR meow (1),
.BR meow\-index (1),
.BR meow\-ask (1),
.BR meow\-config (5)

.SH AUTHORS
Andrew Vasilyev <me@retran.me>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright © 2025 The meowg1k Authors
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
.PP
Project page: https://github.com/retran/meowg1k
