.\" docs/man/meow.1
.TH MEOW 1 "2025-10-04" "meowg1k" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
meow \- your purr-sonal AI sidekick for the terminal
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B meow
[\fIcommand\fR] [\fIflags\fR] [\fIarguments...\fR]
.br
For command\-specific flags, run:
.B meow
\fIcommand\fR \-\-help
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B meow
is a fast, script\-friendly AI CLI designed for automation and scripting.
It is built for CI/CD pipelines, Git hooks, and batch processing, not for
interactive conversation. It transforms code and text into AI-enhanced
results through a Unix-philosophy interface.
.PP
The tool supports multiple LLM providers through a configuration-driven
approach using reusable profiles to simplify working with cloud models
(Gemini, OpenAI, Anthropic, OpenRouter) and local inference (llama.cpp,
OpenAI-compatible APIs).
.PP
Input can be provided via flags and/or piped through stdin. All behavior
is controlled through version-controlled YAML configuration files.

.SH COMMANDS
.SS Code Generation Commands
.TP
.B init
Initialize a new meowg1k project configuration by creating a
.B .meowg1k.yaml
file with sensible defaults. Uses Google Gemini as the default provider.
.TP
.B generate
Generate content based on a prompt and/or context provided via stdin.
Supports predefined tasks and custom prompts. Works with all supported
providers. Aliases: \fBgen\fR, \fBg\fR.
.TP
.B commit
Generate commit messages based on staged changes or the difference between
branches. Supports two strategies: \fBsummarize\fR (Map-Reduce for large
commits) and \fBflat\fR (direct diff for small commits). Alias: \fBc\fR.
.TP
.B pullrequest
Generate Pull Request title and description based on the difference between
your current branch and a base branch. Supports two strategies: \fBsummarize\fR
and \fBflat\fR. Alias: \fBpr\fR.

.SS RAG and Code Search Commands
.TP
.B index
Index workspace files by computing embeddings and building vector indices for
semantic search and RAG-based queries. Processes workdir, stage, and HEAD
snapshots. Alias: \fBidx\fR.
.TP
.B query
Search for code chunks similar to the query text using vector similarity
(semantic search). Returns relevant code with similarity scores. Alias: \fBq\fR.
.TP
.B ask
Ask a question about your codebase and get an AI-generated answer using
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG). Combines semantic search with LLM
reasoning. Alias: \fBa\fR.

.SS Utility Commands
.TP
.B version
Show version information including build date and git commit hash.
.TP
.B completion
Generate shell completion scripts for bash, zsh, fish, and PowerShell.

.SH OPTIONS
Global options available for all commands:
.TP
.BR \-\-config " " \fIFILE\fR
Use a specific configuration file. When specified, ignores project and user
configuration files completely. This overrides all other configuration sources.
.TP
.BR \-\-workspace " " \fIDIRECTORY\fR
Specify the workspace root directory. Overrides automatic workspace detection.
Useful for running commands from outside the project directory or in CI/CD
environments.
.TP
.BR \-\-silent
Enable silent mode. Suppresses progress indicators and non-essential output.
Ideal for scripting and CI/CD pipelines where only the final result is needed.
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-cache
Disable LLM response caching for the current command. Overrides configuration
cache settings.
.TP
.BR \-\-update\-cache
Force a cache refresh by making a fresh request to the LLM and updating the
cache entry with the new response.
.TP
.BR \-h , " \-\-help"
Show help information for
.B meow
or a specific command.

.SH PROVIDERS
.TP
.B gemini
Google Gemini models. Requires
.B MEOW_GEMINI_API_KEY
environment variable.
.TP
.B openai
OpenAI models (GPT\-4, GPT\-3.5, etc.). Requires
.B MEOW_OPENAI_API_KEY
environment variable.
.TP
.B openrouter
OpenRouter aggregated models. Requires
.B MEOW_OPENROUTER_API_KEY
environment variable.
.TP
.B anthropic
Anthropic Claude models. Requires
.B MEOW_ANTHROPIC_API_KEY
environment variable.
.TP
.B voyage
Voyage AI embeddings (recommended by Anthropic). Requires
.B MEOW_VOYAGE_API_KEY
environment variable. Embeddings only.
.TP
.B llama
Local llama.cpp HTTP server. Optionally uses
.B MEOW_LLAMA_API_KEY
environment variable. Requires explicit baseURL in profile.
.TP
.B openai\-compatible
Custom OpenAI\-compatible APIs. Requires
.B MEOW_OPENAI_COMPATIBLE_API_KEY
environment variable and explicit baseURL.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B MEOW_GEMINI_API_KEY
API key for the Gemini provider.
.TP
.B MEOW_OPENAI_API_KEY
API key for the OpenAI provider.
.TP
.B MEOW_OPENROUTER_API_KEY
API key for the OpenRouter provider.
.TP
.B MEOW_ANTHROPIC_API_KEY
API key for the Anthropic provider.
.TP
.B MEOW_VOYAGE_API_KEY
API key for the Voyage AI provider (embeddings only).
.TP
.B MEOW_LLAMA_API_KEY
Optional API key for the llama provider.
.TP
.B MEOW_OPENAI_COMPATIBLE_API_KEY
API key for OpenAI\-compatible providers.

.SH CONFIGURATION
Configuration uses a hierarchical profile-based system. Files are read with
this precedence (each subsequent location overrides the previous):
.IP "1." 3
User config:
.B ~/.config/meowg1k/config.yaml
(personal defaults)
.IP "2."
Project config:
.B ./.meowg1k.yaml
(recommended for team-shared settings, commit to repository)
.IP "3."
Explicit config via \fB\-\-config\fR flag
.br
(highest priority, overrides all others)
.PP
The configuration file has several top-level sections:
.TP
.B models
Model definitions including provider, connection details, and rate limits.
.TP
.B profiles
Reusable LLM request parameters referencing models, with timeout, temperature,
and sampling settings.
.TP
.B cache
Global caching configuration for LLM responses (TTL, enabled status).
.TP
.B filter
Gitignore-style patterns to exclude files from analysis
.br
(for security and noise reduction).
.TP
.B summarize
Map-phase configuration for commit and pullrequest commands, with
.br
rule-based file-specific settings.
.TP
.B generate
Configuration for the generate command, including predefined tasks.
.TP
.B commit
Reduce-phase configuration for generating commit messages. Supports
.br
\fBsummarize\fR and \fBflat\fR strategies.
.TP
.B pullRequest
Reduce-phase configuration for generating PR descriptions. Supports
.br
\fBsummarize\fR and \fBflat\fR strategies.
.TP
.B index
Configuration for indexing workspace files, including embedding profile,
.br
chunker settings, and batch size.
.TP
.B ask
Configuration for RAG-based question answering, including retrieval
.br
parameters (topK, minScore) and answer generation profile.
.PP
See
.BR meow\-config (5)
for detailed configuration syntax and comprehensive examples.

.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Project Initialization
Initialize a new project with default configuration:
.PP
.nf
.B cd /path/to/project
.B meow init
.B export MEOW_GEMINI_API_KEY="your-api-key"
.fi
.PP
Force overwrite existing configuration:
.PP
.nf
.B meow init \-\-force
.fi

.SS Basic Generation
Use a predefined task:
.PP
.nf
.B cat main.go | meow generate \-t review
.fi
.PP
Direct prompt generation:
.PP
.nf
.B echo "Create a REST API" | meow generate \-u "Write Go code"
.fi
.PP
Refactor code with custom prompt:
.PP
.nf
.B cat service.py | meow g \-u "Add comprehensive error handling"
.fi

.SS Commit Message Generation
Generate commit message from staged changes:
.PP
.nf
.B git add .
.B meow commit
.fi
.PP
Provide developer intent:
.PP
.nf
.B meow commit \-i "Fix user authentication bug"
.fi
.PP
Generate squash commit message:
.PP
.nf
.B meow commit \-\-target\-branch main
.fi

.SS Pull Request Description
Generate PR description:
.PP
.nf
.B meow pullrequest \-\-base main
.fi
.PP
With developer intent:
.PP
.nf
.B meow pullrequest \-b dev \-i "Add complete Stripe payment integration"
.fi

.SS RAG and Code Search
Index your codebase:
.PP
.nf
.B meow index
.fi
.PP
Semantic code search:
.PP
.nf
.B meow query "authentication middleware"
.B meow query "error handling" \-\-top\-k 20 \-\-min\-score 0.5
.fi
.PP
Ask questions about your codebase:
.PP
.nf
.B meow ask "How does authentication work in this project?"
.B meow ask "Where are the API routes defined?" \-\-show\-context
.fi
.PP
Search specific snapshots:
.PP
.nf
.B meow query "new feature" \-\-snapshots _workdir_
.B meow ask "What changed?" \-s _workdir_,_stage_
.fi

.SS Project Configuration
Create
.B ./.meowg1k.yaml
with custom profiles and tasks:
.PP
.nf
models:
  gemini-flash:
    provider: "gemini"
    model: "gemini-2.5-flash"
  claude-sonnet:
    provider: "anthropic"
    model: "claude-sonnet-4-5-20250929"
  gemini-embeddings:
    provider: "gemini"
    model: "text-embedding-004"

profiles:
  fast:
    model: "gemini-flash"
  smart:
    model: "claude-sonnet"
  embeddings:
    model: "gemini-embeddings"

generate:
  default:
    profile: "fast"
  tasks:
    security:
      profile: "smart"
      userPrompt: "Perform security analysis"

commit:
  profile: "smart"
  strategy: "summarize"

pullRequest:
  profile: "smart"
  strategy: "summarize"

index:
  profile: "embeddings"
  chunker:
    maxRunes: 1024
    overlapRunes: 128

ask:
  profile: "smart"
  topK: 5
  minScore: 0.7
.fi
.PP
Then use the configuration:
.PP
.nf
.B cat auth.go | meow generate \-t security
.B meow commit
.B meow pr \-\-base main
.fi

.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/.config/meowg1k/config.yaml
User-level configuration file for personal defaults.
.TP
.B ./.meowg1k.yaml
Project-level configuration file. Recommended for team-shared settings.
Should be committed to version control.
.TP
.B ./.meowg1k/logs/
Directory containing trace logs for debugging and auditing. Each command
execution creates a unique timestamped JSON Lines (.jsonl) file with
detailed information about LLM API calls, execution events, and errors.
Should be excluded from version control (already in .gitignore).
.TP
.B ./.meowg1k/meowg1k.db
SQLite database storing indexed documents, embeddings, and vector indices
for RAG functionality. Created automatically by the \fBindex\fR command.

.SH DEBUGGING
.B meow
automatically logs detailed trace information for every command execution
to assist with debugging and auditing. These logs are stored in
.B .meowg1k/logs/
within the workspace root.
.PP
Each command creates a new log file with a unique timestamp:
.br
.B YYYYMMDD_HHMMSS_xxxxx.log.jsonl
.PP
The logs are in JSON Lines format, where each line is a complete JSON object
that can be parsed independently. Three types of log entries are recorded:
.IP \[bu] 2
.B api_interaction:
Complete LLM API calls including request prompts, responses,
timing, and token usage.
.IP \[bu]
.B execution_event:
Flow and activity lifecycle events (running, completed, failed, retry attempts).
.IP \[bu]
.B application_error:
Critical application-level errors with stack traces.
.PP
Example queries using jq:
.PP
.nf
# View the latest log
.B cat .meowg1k/logs/$(ls -t .meowg1k/logs/ | head -1) | jq '.'

# Extract all API interactions
.B cat .meowg1k/logs/*.jsonl | jq 'select(.log_entry_type == "api_interaction")'

# Count execution events by status
.B cat .meowg1k/logs/*.jsonl | jq -r 'select(.log_entry_type == "execution_event") | .status' | sort | uniq -c
.fi
.PP
The workspace root is automatically detected by searching upward from the
current directory for
.BR .meowg1k.yaml ,
.BR .meowg1k.yml ,
or
.B .git
directory. Trace logs are never committed to version control by default.

.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns 0 on success, non-zero on error.

.SH DESIGN PRINCIPLES
.B meow
is built on fundamental principles:
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBA Composable Engine:\fR Designed to be a reliable building block for larger
automated systems, not a monolithic application.
.IP \[bu]
\fBTask Execution:\fR Executes discrete tasks with clear input/output, not
conversational interaction.
.IP \[bu]
\fBNative Performance:\fR Single self-contained binary with zero runtime
dependencies.
.IP \[bu]
\fBRadical Independence:\fR No vendor lock-in; switch providers with a config change.
.IP \[bu]
\fBLocal-First:\fR Can operate completely offline with local models.
.IP \[bu]
\fBConfiguration as Code:\fR All behavior defined in version-controllable YAML files.
.IP \[bu]
\fBSecurity by Design:\fR Never stores secrets; all official releases are
cryptographically signed.
.IP \[bu]
\fBRadically Open:\fR All code including dependencies is open source.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR meow\-init (1),
.BR meow\-generate (1),
.BR meow\-commit (1),
.BR meow\-pullrequest (1),
.BR meow\-version (1),
.BR meow\-config (5),
.BR meow\-security (7)

.SH AUTHORS
Andrew Vasilyev <me@retran.me>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright © 2025 The meowg1k Authors
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
.PP
Project page: https://github.com/retran/meowg1k
