.\" docs/man/meow-draft-pr.1
.TH MEOW-DRAFT-PR 1 "2025-10-04" "meow" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
meow-draft-pr \- draft Pull Request descriptions from branch diffs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B meow draft pr
[\fIflags\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B meow draft pr
generates Pull Request titles and descriptions by analyzing the differences
between your current branch and a specified base branch. It creates
comprehensive, Markdown-formatted PR descriptions suitable for GitHub,
GitLab, Bitbucket, and other code review platforms.
.PP
The command supports two execution strategies (configured in the
.B pr
section):
.PP
.B Summarize Strategy (default):
Uses a two-phase "Map-Reduce" approach:
.IP "1." 3
\fBMap Phase:\fR Each changed file is analyzed individually using
the configuration from the
.B summarize
section. Different files can use different presets and prompts based on
pattern-matching rules. Files can also be skipped entirely (e.g., documentation,
generated files).
.IP "2."
\fBReduce Phase:\fR The individual file summaries are combined and
sent to the AI to generate the final PR description using the configuration
from the
.B pr
section.
.PP
This approach allows you to optimize for both quality (using powerful models
for critical files) and cost (using fast, cheap models or skipping non-critical
files).
.PP
.B Flat Strategy:
Sends the entire git diff directly to the model in a single request. This is
faster and more efficient for small PRs (e.g., a few files or simple changes),
as it eliminates the overhead of the Map-Reduce pipeline. However, if the
diff size exceeds the model's token limit, the command will fail with an
error suggesting you switch to the "summarize" strategy.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-diff " " \fIMODE\fR
Select the diff source. Use \fBbranch\fR (default) to compare against a base
branch or \fBstaged\fR for staged changes.
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-base " " \fIBRANCH\fR
Base branch to compare against when \fB\-\-diff branch\fR is set. Common
values: \fBmain\fR, \fBdev\fR, \fBmaster\fR. The command will analyze all
file differences between the current branch and this base branch.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-intent " " \fITEXT\fR
Provide developer intent or high-level context for the PR. This helps the
AI generate a more focused and accurate description. Can be provided via
this flag or piped through stdin. Example: "This PR adds complete Stripe
payment integration" or "Refactor authentication system to use JWT".
.TP
.BR \-\-workspace " " \fIDIRECTORY\fR
Specify the workspace root directory. Overrides automatic workspace detection.
.TP
.BR \-\-config " " \fIFILE\fR
Use a specific configuration file.
.TP
.BR \-\-silent
Enable silent mode for scripting.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show command help and usage information.

.SH CONFIGURATION
The command uses multiple configuration sections:
.PP
.B filter
(optional): Exclude files from analysis using gitignore-style patterns.
Essential for security (exclude files with secrets) and efficiency (exclude
dependencies, build artifacts):
.PP
.nf
filter:
  ignore:
    - "node_modules/**"
    - "**/*.pem"
    - ".env*"
    - "dist/**"
.fi
.PP
.B summarize
(required): Configure the Map phase where individual files are analyzed.
Supports a default preset and rule-based overrides for specific file patterns:
.PP
.nf
summarize:
  default:
    preset: "gemini-flash"
    systemPrompt: "Summarize this code change"

  rules:
    # Skip documentation changes
    - match: "**/*.md"
      skip: true

    # Use powerful model for critical services
    - match: "internal/services/**/*.go"
      preset: "gemini-pro"
      systemPrompt: "Deep analysis of business logic"

    # Skip test snapshots
    - match: "**/*.snap"
      skip: true
.fi
.PP
.B pr
(required): Configure the Reduce phase where file summaries are combined
into the final PR description. Also controls the execution strategy:
.PP
.nf
pr:
  preset: "gemini-pro"
  strategy: "summarize"  # or "flat" for small PRs
  systemPrompt: |
    You are an expert software engineer writing a Pull Request.
    Based on file summaries, generate a PR description in Markdown:

    ## Goal
    (What problem does this solve?)

    ## Summary of Changes
    - Key change 1
    - Key change 2

    ## How to Test
    1. Step-by-step testing instructions
.fi
.PP
The
.B strategy
field (optional, default: "summarize") determines how the PR description
is generated:
.IP \[bu] 2
\fB"summarize"\fR: Uses the full Map-Reduce workflow. Best for PRs
with many files or complex changes.
.IP \[bu]
\fB"flat"\fR: Sends the raw git diff directly to the model. Faster for
small PRs (few files or minor changes). Fails if diff is too large.
.PP
See
.BR meow\-config (5)
for complete configuration reference.

.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Basic Usage
Generate PR description for changes to merge into main:
.PP
.nf
.B meow draft pr \-\-base main
.fi
.PP
Short form:
.PP
.nf
.B meow draft pr \-b dev
.fi

.SS Providing Developer Intent
Via command-line flag:
.PP
.nf
.B meow draft pr \-b main \-i "Add complete Stripe payment integration"
.fi
.PP
Via stdin:
.PP
.nf
.B echo "Refactor authentication to use JWT tokens" | meow draft pr \-b main
.fi

.SS Advanced Configuration Example
Project configuration with sophisticated rules:
.PP
.nf
# .meowg1k.yaml

presets:
  fast:
    provider: "gemini"
    model: "gemini-2.5-flash"
  smart:
    provider: "anthropic"
    model: "claude-sonnet-4-5-20250929"

filter:
  ignore:
    - "dist/**"
    - "node_modules/**"
    - "**/*.key"
    - ".env*"

summarize:
  default:
    preset: "gemini-flash"

  rules:
    # Skip docs and configs
    - match: "**/*.md"
      skip: true
    - match: "**/*.yaml"
      skip: true

    # Deep analysis for critical code
    - match: "src/billing/**/*.ts"
      preset: "gemini-pro"
      systemPrompt: "Analyze payment logic carefully"

    - match: "src/auth/**/*.ts"
      preset: "gemini-pro"
      systemPrompt: "Security-focused code review"

pr:
  preset: "gemini-pro"
  systemPrompt: |
    Generate a professional PR description with:
    - Clear goal statement
    - Bullet-point summary of changes
    - Step-by-step testing instructions
    - Any breaking changes or migrations needed
.fi
.PP
Then use:
.PP
.nf
.B meow draft pr \-\-base main
.fi

.SS CI/CD Integration
GitHub Actions workflow to auto-generate PR descriptions:
.PP
.nf
name: Auto PR Description

on:
  pull_request:
    types: [opened]

permissions:
  pull-requests: write
  contents: read

jobs:
  generate:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
        with:
          fetch-depth: 0

      - uses: actions/setup-go@v5
        with:
          go-version: '1.25.2'

      - name: Install meow
        run: go install github.com/retran/meowg1k@latest

      - name: Generate Description
        id: generate
        run: |
          DESCRIPTION=$(meow draft pr \\
            --base ${{ github.base_ref }} \\
            --silent)
          echo "DESCRIPTION<<EOF" >> $GITHUB_OUTPUT
          echo "$DESCRIPTION" >> $GITHUB_OUTPUT
          echo "EOF" >> $GITHUB_OUTPUT
        env:
          MEOW_GEMINI_API_KEY: ${{ secrets.MEOW_API_KEY }}

      - name: Update PR
        run: |
          gh pr edit ${{ github.event.pull_request.number }} \\
            --body "${{ steps.write.outputs.DESCRIPTION }}"
        env:
          GH_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
.fi

.SS Silent Mode for Scripts
Use in shell scripts without progress indicators:
.PP
.nf
.B #!/bin/bash
.B PR_DESCRIPTION=$(meow draft pr \-\-base main \-\-silent)
.B echo "$PR_DESCRIPTION" > pr_description.md
.fi

.SH ENVIRONMENT
Providers use environment variables for API keys. The specific variable
depends on the provider configured in your preset:
.TP
.B MEOW_GEMINI_API_KEY
For Gemini provider presets.
.TP
.B MEOW_OPENAI_API_KEY
For OpenAI provider presets.
.TP
.B MEOW_ANTHROPIC_API_KEY
For Anthropic provider presets.
.TP
.B MEOW_OPENROUTER_API_KEY
For OpenRouter provider presets.
.TP
.B MEOW_LLAMA_API_KEY
For llama.cpp provider presets (optional).
.TP
.B MEOW_OPENAI_COMPATIBLE_API_KEY
For OpenAI-compatible provider presets.

.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/.config/meowg1k/config.yaml
User-level configuration.
.TP
.B ./.meowg1k.yaml
Project-level configuration (recommended for teams).

.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns 0 on success, non-zero on error.
.PP
Common errors:
.IP \[bu] 2
Base branch not found or not accessible
.IP \[bu]
No changes between current branch and base branch
.IP \[bu]
Configuration missing required presets or sections
.IP \[bu]
API authentication failure

.SH WORKFLOW
.B Typical Pull Request Workflow:
.IP "1." 3
Complete feature development on your branch
.IP "2."
Generate PR description: \fBmeow draft pr \-\-base main\fR
.IP "3."
Copy output and paste into PR description field
.IP "4."
Review, edit if needed, and submit PR
.PP
.B Automated Workflow with GitHub CLI:
.IP "1." 3
Complete feature development
.IP "2."
Push branch: \fBgit push origin feature-branch\fR
.IP "3."
Create PR with generated description:
.br
.B gh pr create \-\-title "Feature" \-\-body "$(meow draft pr \-b main \-\-silent)"\fR

.SH NOTES
The
.B \-\-base
flag is required because meow cannot reliably auto-detect the intended merge
target. Different projects use different branching strategies (GitFlow,
trunk-based, feature branches), and the default branch may not always be the
intended target.
.PP
For convenience, create shell aliases:
.PP
.nf
alias mpr='meow draft pr \-\-base main'
alias mprd='meow draft pr \-\-base dev'
.fi

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR meow (1),
.BR meow\-init (1),
.BR meow\-write (1),
.BR meow\-draft\-commit (1),
.BR meow\-config (5),
.BR git\-diff (1),
.BR gh\-pr (1)

.SH AUTHORS
Andrew Vasilyev <me@retran.me>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright © 2025 The meow Authors
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
.PP
Project page: https://github.com/retran/meowg1k
