.\" docs/man/meow-init.1
.TH MEOW-INIT 1 "2025-10-11" "meow" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
meow-init \- initialize a new meow project configuration
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B meow init
[\fB\-f\fR|\fB\-\-force\fR]
[\fB\-\-workspace\fR \fIDIR\fR]
[\fB\-\-silent\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B meow init
command creates a new
.B .meowg1k.yaml
configuration file in the current directory (or in the directory specified
by \fB\-\-workspace\fR). This file defines models, profiles, and settings
for all meow commands.
.PP
The generated configuration uses Google Gemini as the default LLM provider
with sensible defaults for all commands. After initialization, you must
obtain an API key from Google AI Studio and set the
.B MEOW_GEMINI_API_KEY
environment variable.
.PP
If a configuration file already exists, the command will fail unless the
.B \-\-force
flag is used.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-force
Overwrite an existing
.B .meowg1k.yaml
configuration file if present. Without this flag, the command fails if
the configuration file already exists.
.TP
.BR \-\-workspace " " \fIDIR\fR
Create the configuration file in directory
.I DIR
instead of the current directory. The directory must exist.
.TP
.BR \-\-silent
Enable silent mode. Only outputs the path to the created configuration
file, suppressing all other messages and instructions.
.TP
.BR \-\-config " " \fIFILE\fR
This global flag has no effect on
.B meow init
as the command creates a new configuration file.
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-cache
This global flag has no effect on
.B meow init
as the command does not use LLM services.
.TP
.BR \-\-update\-cache
This global flag has no effect on
.B meow init
as the command does not use LLM services.

.SH DEFAULT CONFIGURATION
The generated configuration includes:
.TP
.B Models
Two Gemini models are pre-configured:
.RS
.IP \[bu] 2
.B gemini-flash
\- Fast, efficient model (gemini-2.5-flash) with rate limits of 10 requests/min,
250K tokens/min, 250 requests/day
.IP \[bu]
.B gemini-pro
\- Smart, capable model (gemini-2.5-pro) with rate limits of 5 requests/min,
125K tokens/min, 100 requests/day
.RE
.TP
.B Profiles
Two profiles reference the models above:
.RS
.IP \[bu] 2
.B fast
\- Uses gemini-flash, 24h cache TTL
.IP \[bu]
.B smart
\- Uses gemini-pro, 10m timeout, 72h cache TTL
.RE
.TP
.B Commands
Default profiles and prompts for:
.BR generate ,
.BR commit ,
.BR pr ,
.BR summarize ,
and
.BR filter
commands.
.TP
.B Caching
Enabled globally with 24-hour TTL for LLM responses.

.SH EXAMPLES
Initialize a new project in the current directory:
.PP
.nf
.B cd /path/to/project
.B meow init
.fi
.PP
Overwrite an existing configuration:
.PP
.nf
.B meow init --force
.fi
.PP
Create configuration in a specific directory:
.PP
.nf
.B meow init --workspace /path/to/project
.fi
.PP
Silent mode for scripting:
.PP
.nf
.B CONFIG=$(meow init --silent)
.B echo "Created: $CONFIG"
.fi

.SH AFTER INITIALIZATION
After running
.B meow init
, complete these steps:
.PP
.B 1. Get an API key
.RS
Visit https://aistudio.google.com/app/apikey to obtain a free Google Gemini
API key.
.RE
.PP
.B 2. Set environment variable
.RS
Add to your shell profile (~/.bashrc, ~/.zshrc):
.PP
.nf
.B export MEOW_GEMINI_API_KEY="your-api-key-here"
.fi
.PP
Then restart your shell or run:
.PP
.nf
.B source ~/.bashrc
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B 3. Test the setup
.RS
.nf
.B echo "Create a hello world function" | meow write
.fi
.RE

.SH FILES
.TP
.B .meowg1k.yaml
The project configuration file created by this command. This file should be
committed to version control to share settings across the team.
.TP
.B ~/.config/meowg1k/config.yaml
User-level configuration (not created by
.BR init ).
Settings in the project-level
.B .meowg1k.yaml
override user-level settings.

.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns 0 on success. Returns non-zero on error with one of the following:
.TP
.B 1
Configuration file already exists (use
.B \-\-force
to overwrite)
.TP
.B 1
Failed to create configuration file (e.g., permission denied)
.TP
.B 1
Invalid directory specified with
.B \-\-workspace

.SH NOTES
The
.B meow init
command does not require an existing configuration or API keys. It can be
run before setting up any credentials.
.PP
The generated configuration file is a standard YAML file and can be manually
edited to customize models, profiles, prompts, and rate limits.
.PP
The default configuration uses Google Gemini because it offers a generous
free tier. You can edit the configuration to use other providers such as
OpenAI, Anthropic, OpenRouter, or local models via llama.cpp.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR meow (1),
.BR meow\-write (1),
.BR meow\-draft\-commit (1),
.BR meow\-draft\-pr (1),
.BR meow\-config (5),
.BR meow\-security (7)

.SH AUTHORS
Andrew Vasilyev <me@retran.me>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright © 2025 The meow Authors
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
.PP
Project page: https://github.com/retran/meowg1k
