.TH MEOW-SECURITY 7 "2025-10-04" "meowg1k" "Security and Verification"
.SH NAME
meow-security \- verify meowg1k releases and review security metadata
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cosign verify
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fI<artifact-url>\fR
.br
Review SBOM files distributed with each release.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Security is a foundational requirement of \fBmeowg1k\fR, not an add-on.
The project implements security by design across multiple layers:
.PP
.B Release Verification:
All official releases are cryptographically signed and include a software
bill of materials (SBOM). This ensures supply-chain integrity and allows
independent verification that downloaded binaries are exactly those produced
by the official build system.
.PP
.B Secret Management:
The tool never stores or persists API keys or other secrets. All secrets
are only held in memory for the duration of a request and are immediately
discarded.
.PP
.B Data Privacy:
The tool can operate completely offline with local models. When using cloud
providers, users maintain full control over what data is sent and can use
file filtering to exclude sensitive files.
.PP
.B Transparency:
All code, including dependencies, is open source and auditable. The entire
software supply chain is transparent.
.PP
Verification uses \fBcosign\fR in keyless mode, leveraging transparency
logs and OIDC identity for trust. SBOM files are provided in SPDX JSON
format.

.SH COSIGN KEYLESS VERIFICATION
To verify a release artifact using cosign keyless:
.IP "1." 4
Install cosign (https://docs.sigstore.dev/cosign/installation)
.IP "2." 4
Download the release artifact (e.g.,
\fBmeowg1k_<version>_linux_amd64.tar.gz\fR) from:
.br
\fIhttps://github.com/retran/meowg1k/releases\fR
.IP "3." 4
Run:
.br
.EX
cosign verify-blob \
  --certificate-oidc-issuer=https://token.actions.githubusercontent.com \
  --certificate-identity=https://github.com/retran/meowg1k/.github/workflows/release.yml@refs/tags/<version> \
  --signature <artifact>.sig \
  <artifact>
.EE
This confirms the artifact was built and signed in the official GitHub
Actions workflow for the tagged release.

.SH SBOM
Each release includes an SBOM file named:
.br
\fBsbom_<version>.spdx.json\fR
.br
This document lists all dependencies, their licenses, and checksums,
allowing you to audit the build contents.

View or process the SBOM with:
.EX
cat sbom_<version>.spdx.json | jq .
.EE

.SH SECURITY PRACTICES

.SS Using Local Models for Sensitive Code
For maximum security with proprietary or sensitive code, use a local llama.cpp
server:
.PP
.nf
# Configuration (.meowg1k.yaml)
profiles:
  secure-local:
    provider: "llama"
    baseURL: "http://localhost:8080"

generate:
  default:
    profile: "secure-local"
.fi

.SS File Filtering for Privacy
Use the filter section to prevent sensitive files from ever being sent to
any provider:
.PP
.nf
filter:
  ignore:
    # Exclude files with secrets
    - "**/*.pem"
    - "**/*.key"
    - ".env*"
    - "secrets.yaml"
    - "terraform.tfstate"

    # Exclude proprietary code
    - "internal/proprietary/**"
    - "legacy/confidential/**"
.fi

.SS Best Practices
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBNever commit API keys:\fR Always use environment variables, never hardcode
keys in configuration files.
.IP \[bu]
\fBUse .gitignore:\fR Ensure .env files and other secrets are in .gitignore.
.IP \[bu]
\fBFilter aggressively:\fR When in doubt, exclude files from analysis using
the filter section.
.IP \[bu]
\fBLocal for compliance:\fR Use local models for HIPAA, SOC 2, or other
compliance requirements.
.IP \[bu]
\fBVerify releases:\fR Always verify official releases using cosign before
deployment in production environments.
.IP \[bu]
\fBAudit dependencies:\fR Review the SBOM to understand all dependencies and
their licenses.

.SH NOTES
Cosign keyless verification does not require you to manage signing keys.
Trust is established via GitHub's OIDC identity and recorded in a public
transparency log.

SBOM files follow the SPDX 2.3 specification and can be processed with
standard SPDX tools.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cosign (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR meow (1),
.BR meow\-config (5),
.BR meow\-generate (1),
.BR meow\-commit (1),
.BR meow\-pullrequest (1),
.BR meow\-version (1)
.PP
Security Policy: https://github.com/retran/meowg1k/blob/main/SECURITY.md

.SH AUTHORS
Andrew Vasilyev <me@retran.me>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2025 Andrew Vasilyev.
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
.PP
Project page: https://github.com/retran/meowg1k
