.\" docs/man/meow-ask.1
.TH MEOW-ASK 1 "2025-10-15" "meowg1k" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
meow-ask \- ask questions about your codebase using RAG
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B meow ask
\fIQUESTION\fR [\fIflags\fR]
.br
.B meow a
\fIQUESTION\fR [\fIflags\fR]
.br
.B echo
"\fIQUESTION\fR" |
.B meow ask
[\fIflags\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B meow ask
asks questions about your codebase and gets AI-generated answers using
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG). Unlike simple semantic search, RAG
combines code retrieval with LLM reasoning to provide natural language
explanations grounded in your actual codebase.
.PP
The command:
.IP "1." 3
Performs semantic search to find relevant code chunks (like \fBmeow query\fR)
.IP "2."
Retrieves the top-K most relevant chunks based on similarity
.IP "3."
Formats the retrieved code as context
.IP "4."
Sends the context + your question to an LLM
.IP "5."
Returns an answer based on your actual code, not general knowledge
.PP
This is more powerful than
.BR meow-query (1)
because it synthesizes information from multiple code chunks and provides
explanations, not just code locations.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-profile " " \fINAME\fR
Profile to use for answer generation. Overrides the profile configured in
the \fBask\fR section. Use to select a more powerful model for complex
questions.
.TP
.BR \-k ", " \-\-top\-k " " \fINUMBER\fR
Number of code chunks to retrieve as context. Default: uses value from
configuration. Set to 0 to use config default. Higher values provide more
context but may introduce noise.
.TP
.BR \-\-min\-score " " \fIFLOAT\fR
Minimum similarity score for retrieved chunks (0.0 to 1.0). Default: uses
value from configuration. Set to 0.0 to use config default. Higher values =
more relevant context but fewer chunks.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-snapshots " " \fILIST\fR
Snapshots to search. Comma-separated list of: \fB_workdir_\fR, \fB_stage_\fR,
\fB_head_\fR. Default: all three. Example: \fB_workdir_,_stage_\fR.
.TP
.BR \-\-show\-context
Show the retrieved code context before the answer. Useful for understanding
what code the AI is analyzing and for debugging unexpected answers.
.TP
.BR \-\-system\-prompt " " \fITEXT\fR
Override the system prompt for answer generation. The system prompt guides
the AI's behavior. Default: uses prompt from configuration.
.TP
.BR \-\-workspace " " \fIDIRECTORY\fR
Specify the workspace root directory. Overrides automatic workspace detection.
.TP
.BR \-\-config " " \fIFILE\fR
Use a specific configuration file.
.TP
.BR \-\-silent
Enable silent mode. Only outputs the answer, no progress indicators.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show command help and usage information.

.SH CONFIGURATION
The command uses two configuration sections:
.PP
.B index
(required): Specifies the embedding profile used for semantic search.
Must match the profile used with
.BR meow-index (1):
.PP
.nf
index:
  profile: "embeddings"
.fi
.PP
.B ask
(required): Configures answer generation and retrieval parameters:
.PP
.nf
ask:
  profile: "smart"      # LLM profile for generating answers
  topK: 5               # Number of chunks to retrieve
  minScore: 0.7         # Minimum similarity score
  systemPrompt: >-
    You are an expert AI assistant helping developers
    understand their codebase. Answer questions based
    ONLY on the provided code context. Be precise,
    concise, and reference specific code elements.
    If the context doesn't contain enough information,
    clearly state that.
.fi
.PP
Complete example:
.PP
.nf
models:
  gemini-embeddings:
    provider: "gemini"
    model: "text-embedding-004"
  claude-sonnet:
    provider: "anthropic"
    model: "claude-sonnet-4-5-20250929"

profiles:
  embeddings:
    model: "gemini-embeddings"
  smart:
    model: "claude-sonnet"

index:
  profile: "embeddings"

ask:
  profile: "smart"
  topK: 5
  minScore: 0.7
.fi

.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Basic Questions
Ask about system architecture:
.PP
.nf
.B meow ask "How does authentication work in this project?"
.fi
.PP
Example answer:
.PP
.nf
Based on the codebase, authentication works as follows:

1. **Token Validation**: The AuthService in internal/auth/service.go
   receives a JWT token and validates it using the JWTService.

2. **Claims Extraction**: Upon successful validation, user claims
   (including UserID) are extracted from the token.

3. **User Lookup**: The system queries the user repository to find
   the user by ID.

4. **Error Handling**: Both token validation and user lookup have
   proper error handling with context-aware error messages.

The main authentication flow is implemented in the Authenticate
method at internal/auth/service.go:45-67.
.fi

.SS Specific Implementation Questions
Find where specific functionality is implemented:
.PP
.nf
.B meow ask "Where is the JWT token validated?"
.B meow ask "How do I add a new API endpoint?"
.B meow ask "What is the database connection strategy?"
.fi

.SS Using Different Models
Use a more powerful model for complex questions:
.PP
.nf
.B meow ask "Explain the overall architecture" \-\-profile smart
.fi

.SS See Retrieved Context
Debug answers by showing what code the AI is using:
.PP
.nf
.B meow ask "How does error handling work?" \-\-show\-context
.fi
.PP
Output:
.PP
.nf
=== Retrieved Context ===

[Chunk 1: internal/handlers/user.go:45-58]
func (h *Handler) CreateUser(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
    // ... code omitted ...
}

[Chunk 2: internal/errors/handler.go:12-28]
// ... code omitted ...

=== Answer ===
The error handling strategy uses [context from retrieved code]
.fi

.SS Adjust Retrieval Parameters
Search more thoroughly for broad questions:
.PP
.nf
.B meow ask "How does the system work?" \-\-top\-k 10 \-\-min\-score 0.5
.fi
.PP
Focus on highly relevant code for specific questions:
.PP
.nf
.B meow ask "Where is validateUser defined?" \-\-top\-k 3 \-\-min\-score 0.8
.fi

.SS Search Specific Snapshots
Ask about uncommitted changes:
.PP
.nf
.B meow ask "What did I change in the auth system?" \-\-snapshots _workdir_
.fi

.SS Questions from Stdin
Pipe questions via stdin:
.PP
.nf
.B echo "How do I add a new user?" | meow ask
.fi
.PP
Use in scripts:
.PP
.nf
#!/bin/bash
while IFS= read -r question; do
    echo "Q: $question"
    meow ask "$question" \-\-silent
    echo
done < questions.txt
.fi

.SH USE CASES
.SS Onboarding to New Codebase
Quickly understand unfamiliar projects:
.PP
.nf
.B meow ask "What is the overall architecture?"
.B meow ask "What frameworks and libraries are used?"
.B meow ask "How is the database layer structured?"
.B meow ask "Where is the main entry point?"
.fi

.SS Code Review
Understand changes with full context:
.PP
.nf
.B meow ask "What impact will these changes have on authentication?"
.B meow ask "Are there related functions that should be updated?"
.B meow ask "Does this follow existing patterns?"
.fi

.SS Development
Get implementation guidance:
.PP
.nf
.B meow ask "How do I add a new protected endpoint?"
.B meow ask "What is the error handling pattern I should follow?"
.B meow ask "How are tests organized?"
.fi

.SH TUNING GUIDELINES
.SS Broad Questions
For general understanding or exploration:
.IP \[bu] 2
Higher \fB\-\-top-k\fR (10-20) — retrieve more context
.IP \[bu]
Lower \fB\-\-min-score\fR (0.5-0.6) — cast wider net
.IP \[bu]
Use powerful model (\fB\-\-profile smart\fR)
.PP
Examples: "How does the system work?", "Explain the architecture",
"What are the main components?"

.SS Specific Questions
For finding particular implementations:
.IP \[bu] 2
Lower \fB\-\-top-k\fR (3-5) — focused context
.IP \[bu]
Higher \fB\-\-min-score\fR (0.7-0.8) — precise matching
.IP \[bu]
Default model may suffice
.PP
Examples: "Where is the login function?", "How is JWT validated?",
"What does calculateTotal do?"

.SH TROUBLESHOOTING
.SS Answers Not Accurate
Possible causes and solutions:
.IP \[bu] 2
Irrelevant context: Increase \fB\-\-min-score\fR, use \fB\-\-show-context\fR
to verify
.IP \[bu]
Not enough context: Increase \fB\-\-top-k\fR
.IP \[bu]
Outdated index: Run \fBmeow index\fR to refresh
.IP \[bu]
Question too vague: Be more specific
.PP
.nf
# Debug with context visibility
.B meow ask "your question" \-\-show\-context
.fi

.SS "No relevant context found"
Solutions:
.IP \[bu] 2
Lower \fB\-\-min-score\fR threshold
.IP \[bu]
Increase \fB\-\-top-k\fR
.IP \[bu]
Make question more general
.IP \[bu]
Check that relevant files are indexed (not excluded by filters)
.IP \[bu]
Re-index if codebase changed

.SS Index Must Be Built First
.B meow ask
requires an existing index:
.PP
.nf
.B meow index
.B meow ask "your question"
.fi

.SH COMPARISON WITH QUERY
.TP
.BR meow-query (1)
Returns code chunks with similarity scores. Use when you want to find code
locations, not explanations. Output: file paths, line numbers, code snippets.
.TP
.BR meow-ask (1)
Returns natural language answers based on retrieved code. Use when you want
understanding, explanations, or guidance. Output: human-readable text with
references to code.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
Uses environment variables for both embedding and answer generation:
.TP
.B MEOW_GEMINI_API_KEY
For Gemini models (embedding and/or generation).
.TP
.B MEOW_OPENAI_API_KEY
For OpenAI models.
.TP
.B MEOW_ANTHROPIC_API_KEY
For Anthropic models.
.TP
.B MEOW_VOYAGE_API_KEY
For Voyage AI embeddings.
.TP
.B MEOW_LLAMA_API_KEY
For llama.cpp server (optional).

.SH FILES
.TP
.B ./.meowg1k/meowg1k.db
SQLite database containing vector indices. Must exist (created by
\fBmeow index\fR).
.TP
.B ./.meowg1k.yaml
Configuration file specifying embedding profile, answer generation profile,
and retrieval parameters.

.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns 0 on success, non-zero on error.
.PP
Common errors:
.IP \[bu] 2
No index found (run \fBmeow index\fR first)
.IP \[bu]
API authentication failure
.IP \[bu]
No relevant context found (question too specific or index incomplete)

.SH BEST PRACTICES
.TP
.B Start broad, then narrow
Begin with general questions to understand the codebase, then ask specific
questions about implementations.
.TP
.B Use \-\-show-context for verification
When answers seem wrong, show context to understand what code the AI is
analyzing.
.TP
.B Keep index updated
Re-index after significant changes or branch switches for accurate answers.
.TP
.B Tune retrieval parameters
Adjust \fB\-\-top-k\fR and \fB\-\-min-score\fR based on question type (broad
vs. specific).
.TP
.B Use appropriate models
Use powerful models for complex reasoning, fast models for simple questions.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR meow (1),
.BR meow\-index (1),
.BR meow\-query (1),
.BR meow\-config (5)

.SH AUTHORS
Andrew Vasilyev <me@retran.me>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright © 2025 The meowg1k Authors
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
.PP
Project page: https://github.com/retran/meowg1k
