.\" docs/man/meow-index.1
.TH MEOW-INDEX 1 "2025-10-15" "meow" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
meow-index \- index workspace files for semantic search and RAG
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B meow index
[\fIflags\fR]
.br
.B meow idx
[\fIflags\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B meow index
processes workspace files by computing embeddings and building vector indices
for semantic search and Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) capabilities.
.PP
The indexing process includes:
.IP \[bu] 2
Scanning three workspace snapshots: \fB_workdir_\fR (uncommitted changes),
\fB_stage_\fR (staged for commit), and \fB_head_\fR (last commit)
.IP \[bu]
Deduplicating files based on content hashes to avoid reprocessing unchanged
files
.IP \[bu]
Chunking new/modified files into smaller pieces with configurable overlap
.IP \[bu]
Computing embeddings in batches using the configured embedding model
.IP \[bu]
Saving document versions and chunks to SQLite database
.IP \[bu]
Building HNSW (Hierarchical Navigable Small World) vector indices for each
snapshot to enable fast similarity search
.PP
The index is stored in \fB.meowg1k/meowg1k.db\fR within the workspace root.
All index data is local and never leaves your machine unless you configure
a cloud embedding provider.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-workspace " " \fIDIRECTORY\fR
Specify the workspace root directory. Overrides automatic workspace detection.
.TP
.BR \-\-config " " \fIFILE\fR
Use a specific configuration file.
.TP
.BR \-\-silent
Enable silent mode for scripting. Suppresses progress output.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show command help and usage information.

.SH CONFIGURATION
The command uses the
.B index
configuration section:
.PP
.nf
index:
  profile: "embeddings"  # Profile with embedding model

  chunker:
    maxRunes: 1024       # Maximum chunk size in Unicode runes
    overlapRunes: 128    # Overlap between consecutive chunks

  batchSize: 64          # Chunks per embedding API call
.fi
.PP
The profile must reference a model that supports embeddings:
.PP
.nf
models:
  gemini-embeddings:
    provider: "gemini"
    model: "text-embedding-004"

profiles:
  embeddings:
    model: "gemini-embeddings"
.fi
.PP
Supported embedding providers:
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBGemini\fR: text-embedding-004 (768 dimensions, free)
.IP \[bu]
\fBOpenAI\fR: text-embedding-3-small, text-embedding-3-large
.IP \[bu]
\fBVoyage AI\fR: voyage-code-2 (optimized for code)
.IP \[bu]
\fBLlama.cpp\fR: Local models like nomic-embed-text-v1.5 (complete privacy)
.PP
Use
.B filter
section to exclude files from indexing:
.PP
.nf
filter:
  ignore:
    - "node_modules/**"
    - "vendor/**"
    - "dist/**"
    - "**/*.generated.go"
    - "**/*.pb.go"
.fi

.SH CHUNKING STRATEGY
Chunking splits files into smaller pieces for embedding. Configuration affects
search quality:
.PP
.B Large chunks (maxRunes: 2048):
.RS
More context per result, fewer total chunks, faster indexing, less precise
matching. Best for documentation and narrative text.
.RE
.PP
.B Small chunks (maxRunes: 512):
.RS
More precise matching, more total chunks, slower indexing, less context per
result. Best for finding specific functions and targeted searches.
.RE
.PP
.B Recommended: maxRunes: 1024, overlapRunes: 128
.RS
Good balance for most codebases. The overlap ensures code spanning chunk
boundaries doesn't get split awkwardly.
.RE

.SH SNAPSHOT SYSTEM
The index maintains three snapshots of your workspace:
.TP
.B _head_
Files as they exist in the last commit (HEAD). Represents committed code.
.TP
.B _stage_
Files currently staged for commit (git add). Represents code about to be
committed.
.TP
.B _workdir_
Files in your working directory with uncommitted changes. Represents
work-in-progress code.
.PP
This allows searching through historical code (HEAD), staged changes, and
current work simultaneously. When searching with
.BR meow-search (1)
or
.BR meow-ask (1),
results from all three snapshots are merged and sorted by similarity.

.SH DEDUPLICATION
The indexer uses content-based deduplication to avoid reprocessing unchanged
files:
.IP "1." 3
Compute SHA-256 hash of each file's content
.IP "2."
Check if document version with that hash exists in database
.IP "3."
If yes, reuse existing chunks and embeddings
.IP "4."
If no, chunk the file and compute new embeddings
.PP
This makes incremental indexing very fast\(emonly changed files are
reprocessed.

.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Initial Indexing
Index your codebase for the first time:
.PP
.nf
.B cd /path/to/project
.B meow index
.fi
.PP
Progress output:
.PP
.nf
▶ Starting index reconciliation
  ▶ Scanning workspace state
    ✓ Scanned workspace: 147 files
  ▶ Deduplicating files
    ✓ Prepared 147 files
  ▶ Chunking 147 files
    ✓ Chunked 147 files → 1,234 chunks
  ▶ Computing embeddings: 1,234 chunks in 20 batches
    ✓ Computed 1,234 embeddings
  ▶ Building indices
    ✓ Built index: _head_
    ✓ Built index: _stage_
    ✓ Built index: _workdir_
✓ Index reconciliation complete
.fi

.SS Incremental Indexing
After making changes, re-index to update:
.PP
.nf
.B # Make code changes
.B vim src/auth.go

.B # Re-index (only changed files processed)
.B meow index
.fi
.PP
Progress output:
.PP
.nf
▶ Starting index reconciliation
  ▶ Scanning workspace state
    ✓ Scanned workspace: 147 files
  ▶ Deduplicating files
    ✓ Prepared 1 files (146 cached)
  ▶ Chunking 1 files
    ✓ Chunked 1 files → 8 chunks
  ▶ Computing embeddings: 8 chunks in 1 batches
    ✓ Computed 8 embeddings
  ...
.fi

.SS Silent Mode for Automation
Index in CI/CD or Git hooks:
.PP
.nf
.B meow index \-\-silent
.fi

.SS Using Local Embedding Model
For complete privacy with llama.cpp:
.PP
.nf
# Start llama.cpp server with embedding model
.B llama-server -m nomic-embed-text-v1.5.Q4_K_M.gguf \\
  --port 8080 --embeddings

# Configure in .meowg1k.yaml:
# models:
#   local-embeddings:
#     provider: "llama"
#     model: "nomic-embed-text-v1.5"
#     baseURL: "http://localhost:8080"
# profiles:
#   embeddings:
#     model: "local-embeddings"
# index:
#   profile: "embeddings"
#   batchSize: 1  # Process one chunk at a time for local

# Index with local model
.B meow index
.fi

.SH ENVIRONMENT
Embedding providers use these environment variables for API keys:
.TP
.B MEOW_GEMINI_API_KEY
API key for Gemini embedding models.
.TP
.B MEOW_OPENAI_API_KEY
API key for OpenAI embedding models.
.TP
.B MEOW_VOYAGE_API_KEY
API key for Voyage AI embedding models.
.TP
.B MEOW_LLAMA_API_KEY
Optional API key for llama.cpp server.

.SH FILES
.TP
.B ./.meowg1k/meowg1k.db
SQLite database storing indexed documents, embeddings, and vector indices.
Created automatically by this command.
.TP
.B ./.meowg1k.yaml
Project-level configuration specifying embedding model and chunking parameters.

.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns 0 on success, non-zero on error.
.PP
Common errors:
.IP \[bu] 2
Embedding API authentication failure
.IP \[bu]
Rate limit exceeded
.IP \[bu]
Invalid configuration (missing profile or model)
.IP \[bu]
Insufficient disk space for index

.SH BEST PRACTICES
.TP
.B Re-index regularly
Run after pulling changes, switching branches, or making significant code
changes. Consider automating with a post-checkout Git hook.
.TP
.B Use aggressive filters
Exclude dependencies (node_modules, vendor), build artifacts (dist, target),
generated code, and test fixtures. This reduces index size and improves
search quality.
.TP
.B Tune chunking for your codebase
Small files (<100 lines): use smaller chunks (512 runes).
Large files (>1000 lines): use larger chunks (1536 runes).
Documentation: use larger chunks (2048 runes).
.TP
.B Enable caching
Cache embeddings to avoid recomputing for repeated indexing operations:
.PP
.nf
profiles:
  embeddings:
    model: "gemini-embeddings"
    cache:
      enabled: true
      ttl: "168h"  # 1 week
.fi

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR meow (1),
.BR meow\-query (1),
.BR meow\-ask (1),
.BR meow\-config (5)

.SH AUTHORS
Andrew Vasilyev <me@retran.me>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright © 2025 The meow Authors
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
.PP
Project page: https://github.com/retran/meowg1k