.\" docs/man/meow-write.1
.TH MEOW-WRITE 1 "2025-10-04" "meow" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
meow-write \- generate content based on prompts and context
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B meow write
[\fIflags\fR]
.br
.B meow gen
[\fIflags\fR]
.br
.B meow g
[\fIflags\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B meow write
generates content using configured AI provider profiles and tasks. It is
designed for automation and scripting, transforming input into AI-enhanced
output through a predictable pipeline.
.PP
Input can be provided via stdin (for context) and/or command-line flags
(for instructions). The command supports predefined tasks configured in
YAML files and ad-hoc prompts for one-off operations.
.PP
All providers (Gemini, OpenAI, Anthropic, OpenRouter, llama.cpp, and
OpenAI-compatible APIs) are supported through the unified profile system
with smart defaults and minimal configuration required.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-task " " \fINAME\fR
Run a predefined task from configuration. Tasks are defined in the
.B write.tasks
section of config files. Tasks can specify a profile, system prompt,
and user prompt, allowing complex, reusable workflows to be invoked
with a simple name.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-system\-prompt " " \fITEXT\fR
Override the system prompt. The system prompt sets the AI's role and
behavior (e.g., "You are an expert Go developer"). If not specified,
uses the system prompt from the task or profile configuration.
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-user\-prompt " " \fITEXT\fR
Specify the user prompt (instruction) for generation. This tells the AI
what to do with the provided context. Can be combined with stdin to
provide both context and instruction.
.TP
.BR \-\-workspace " " \fIDIRECTORY\fR
Specify the workspace root directory. Overrides automatic workspace detection.
.TP
.BR \-\-config " " \fIFILE\fR
Use a specific configuration file.
.TP
.BR \-\-silent
Enable silent mode for scripting.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show command help and usage information.

.SH CONFIGURATION
Uses the profile system defined in
.BR meow\-config (5).
Profiles specify provider, model, timeout, rate limiting, and token caps
with smart defaults for each provider.
.PP
The
.B generate
section in configuration files defines default settings and tasks:
.PP
.nf
generate:
  default:
    profile: "gemini-flash"              # Default profile for generate
    systemPrompt: "You are..."   # Optional default system prompt

  tasks:
    review:
      profile: "gemini-pro"           # Override profile for this task
      systemPrompt: "Expert reviewer..."
      userPrompt: "Review this code thoroughly"

    security:
      profile: "gemini-pro"
      userPrompt: "Analyze for security vulnerabilities"
.fi
.PP
Configuration files are read with hierarchical precedence:
.IP "1." 3
User config: \fB~/.config/meowg1k/config.yaml\fR
.IP "2."
Project config: \fB./.meowg1k.yaml\fR
.IP "3."
Explicit config via \fB\-\-config\fR flag
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Using Predefined Tasks
Run a code review task:
.PP
.nf
.B cat main.go | meow write \-t review
.fi
.PP
Security analysis with predefined configuration:
.PP
.nf
.B cat auth.go | meow write \-t security
.fi

.SS Ad-Hoc Prompts
Provide context via stdin and instruction via flag:
.PP
.nf
.B cat service.py | meow write \-u "Add comprehensive error handling"
.fi
.PP
Generate from text prompt alone:
.PP
.nf
.B echo "Create a REST API" | meow g \-u "Write Go code with proper structure"
.fi
.PP
Refactor JavaScript to TypeScript:
.PP
.nf
.B echo "function add(a, b) { return a + b; }" | meow g \\
  \-s "You are a TypeScript expert" \\
  \-u "Convert to TypeScript with type hints"
.fi

.SS Using Different Providers
With Gemini (free tier):
.PP
.nf
.B export MEOW_GEMINI_API_KEY="your-key"
.B cat code.go | meow g \-u "Explain this code"
.fi
.PP
With local llama.cpp server:
.PP
.nf
# Ensure profile configured in .meowg1k.yaml:
# profiles:
#   local:
#     provider: "llama"
#     baseURL: "http://localhost:8080"
#
# generate:
#   default:
#     profile: "local"

.B cat sensitive.go | meow g \-u "Review for issues"
.fi

.SS Silent Mode for Scripts
Generate without progress indicators:
.PP
.nf
.B cat input.txt | meow write \-u "Summarize" \-\-silent > output.txt
.fi

.SH ENVIRONMENT
Providers use these environment variables for API keys:
.TP
.B MEOW_GEMINI_API_KEY
API key for Gemini provider.
.TP
.B MEOW_OPENAI_API_KEY
API key for OpenAI provider.
.TP
.B MEOW_OPENROUTER_API_KEY
API key for OpenRouter provider.
.TP
.B MEOW_ANTHROPIC_API_KEY
API key for Anthropic provider.
.TP
.B MEOW_VOYAGE_API_KEY
API key for Voyage AI provider (embeddings only).
.TP
.B MEOW_LLAMA_API_KEY
Optional API key for llama provider.
.TP
.B MEOW_OPENAI_COMPATIBLE_API_KEY
API key for OpenAI-compatible providers.

.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns 0 on success, non-zero on error.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR meow (1),
.BR meow\-init (1),
.BR meow\-version (1),
.BR meow\-config (5),
.BR meow\-security (7)